AI coding tools are everywhere now.
GitHub Copilot, Cursor, Claude Code,
Chat, GPT, and those are just the ones
beginning with the letter C. We're told
they make us faster, more productive,
more efficient. But there's a much more
important question that fewer people
seem to ask. What happens after the AI
has written the code? What happens when
the next developer has to understand it?
When the code has to be changed? When it
has to be maintained? Does AI help with
this or are we busy creating an AI slop
driven maintenance nightmare? That's our
topic for today.
Hi, I'm Dave Farley and welcome to the
modern software engineering channel. If
you haven't been here before, please do
hit subscribe and if you enjoy the
content here today, hit like as well.
Maintainability is so important because
it is maintenance and not the initial
development that is the dominant cost in
software development. It's largely naive
nonsense to imagine that you can develop
software once and then never revisit
again. Estimates range widely, but it's
generally assumed that maintenance costs
somewhere between three to four times
more than the initial cost of
development over the lifetime of a
software system. with maintenance
representing 50 to 80% of the total cost
of ownership.
Most of the money, time, and risk in
software then happens after the first
version has shipped. This is one of
several reasons why developing software
that's easy to maintain, easy to change,
makes commercial sense. While optimizing
for short-term dumb metrics like feature
count is a rather silly tradeoff. Yet
most AI studies stop at did the software
developer finish faster? Did they type
fewer characters? That's not
engineering. That's measuring typing
speed. So when I was asked to help with
a pre-registered controlled experiment
that actually looked at downstream
maintainability, I paid attention. And
yes, full disclosure here, I am one of
the authors, though I confess that the
other people did all of the real work,
not me. I helped contribute some initial
ideas very early on, and I helped the
researchers to find experimental victims
via this channel. Some longtime viewers
may remember the episode.
The research is now published, though,
so let's take a look at the findings now
that we have evidence on the table. This
wasn't a toy experiment. In fact, it's
one of the more thorough looks at the
impact of AI on software development so
far. It involved 151 participants with
95% of them being professional software
developers. This is unusual. Most
studies are based on students because
they're usually easier to recruit. Our
research asked these professionals to
create and maintain a realistic Java web
application in two carefully controlled
phases. Phase one, developers were asked
to add a feature to some rather
unpleasant buggy code. Some using AI
assistants, some not. Phase two, a
different set of developers were then
randomly assigned code produced in phase
one and asked to evolve it without
knowledge of whether it was originally
written with the help of AI or not. No
AI assistance was allowed in phase two.
That's the key. We're not measuring how
fast the same person works with AI.
We're measuring how easy the code is for
someone else to change it later on.
That's a much better proxy for
maintainability and generally for code
health. The research was meant to
simulate a more realistic, broader view
of real world development in practice
and measure the impact of AI assistance
on that. Let me pause there and say
thank you to our sponsors. We're
extremely fortunate to be sponsored here
by Equal Experts, Transfic, and Octopus
Deploy. Equal Experts is a multinational
consultancy built on applying the ideas
and techniques that we talk about here
to build great software for their
clients. All of these companies offer
products and services though that are
very well aligned with the topics that
we discuss on this channel every week.
So if you're looking for excellence in
continuous delivery and software
engineering, do click on their links in
the description below and check them
out. The research that we're talking
about here was conducted with the aim of
controlling the variables where we
could. So the researchers didn't just
guess, they measured. They measured how
long the next developer took to evolve
the code. The objective code quality
based on code scenes code health metric.
There are links to that in the
description below. test coverage and
perceived productivity using the space
framework also linked in the description
below. This range of measures is
important because maintainability is so
multi-dimensional. There isn't just one
magic number and anyone claiming that
there is should probably be treated with
a little bit of suspicion. So what did
we find? Well, the headline is there was
no significant difference between the
cost of maintenance between AI and human
generated code. That's interesting and
perhaps not what we might have expected.
Code written with AI assistance was no
harder to change, no easier to change,
no worse in quality and no better in
quality. From a downstream perspective,
AI didn't break anything. And frankly,
given some of the fear-mongering, that's
a pretty significant result and a
finding that, as far as I understand it,
is new to this research. Now, here's
where things line up more with previous
studies. In phase one, AI users were
about 30% faster to get to a solution.
Not as extravagant as some of the claims
for AI productivity, but not nothing
either. Habitual AI users were closer to
55% faster. So, yes, AI clearly speeds
up initial development. That part isn't
really very controversial anymore,
though. I think the real question was
whether that speed came at some hidden
cost. And in this study, there was no
evidence that it did. But there was
something else that the study found that
was very interesting. When experienced
developers, people who already knew what
they were doing, used AI habitually,
their code showed a small but measurable
improvement in maintainability later on.
It's not a huge effect, but it is
consistent. One explanation is that AI
tends to produce boring, idiomatic,
unsurprising code. And boring code is
good. Surprise is usually the enemy of
maintainability. But I wonder if there
is more to it that's going on here. What
is very clear is AI does not
automatically improve code quality. We
can't stop caring about engineering
discipline. Junior developers can't
simply vibe their way to good systems.
In fact, the study shows that developer
skill matters more than AI usage. This
aligns strongly with a message that I
have mentioned here before and that was
backed up by the recent Dora research
into the impact of AI. Fundamentally, AI
code assistance acts as a kind of
amplifier. If you're already doing the
right things, AI will amplify the impact
of those things. If you're already doing
the wrong things, AO will help you to
dig a deeper hole faster. Tools amplify
capability. They don't replace it.
There's an extremely good article by
Jason Gorman. There's a link to that in
the description below, too, that
explores this idea in a bit more detail.
But inevitably, I like his breakdown of
what doing the right things means in the
context of getting the best from AI
coding assistants. He says, "Working in
small batches, solving one problem at a
time, iterating rapidly with continuous
testing, code review, refactoring, and
integration, architecting highly modular
designs that localize the blast radius
for changes. Organizing around
end-to-end outcomes instead of around
role or technology specialisms. Working
with high autonomy, making timely
decisions on the ground instead of
sending them up the chain of command.
For regular viewers of this channel,
none of this will come as any surprise
at all. I suppose that this may have
inadvertently had an impact on the
findings from the AI research. Most of
the participants in the study were
selected from people who responded to an
invitation to participate here on this
channel. So, they were viewers of this
channel, which presumably, or at least
I'd hope, means that they were already
predisposed to doing a better job of
development in this sense. So maybe they
were pre-selected from the set of people
more likely to do this better job. If
you're interested in learning how to do
a better job, why not join our mail list
and get access to how-to guides, free
tutorials, and discounts on training
courses for you and your team, including
discounts on our five-star rated
accepted testdriven development with BDD
course, which is particularly applicable
to working more effectively with AI. The
authors of our study highlight two other
things that represent the slippery slope
towards disaster. First is code bloat.
When generating code becomes almost
free, the temptation is to generate far
too much of it. Volume alone is a
massive driver of complexity in code and
AI makes it easier than ever to drown in
your own code base. The second problem
is cognitive debt. If developers stop
thinking, really thinking about the code
that they create, then over time
understanding erodess, skills atrophy,
and innovation slows. This is exactly
the kind of long-term risk that doesn't
show up in a sprint metric. So, here's
my conclusion. AI assistants clearly
improve short-term productivity. And
contrary to a lot of popular opinion,
they do not appear to damage the
maintainability of the systems that they
produce. And they might even slightly
improve it when they're used well, but
they don't remove the need for good
engineering. They don't remove the need
for good design and the kind of broad
understanding and experience that allows
us to produce good design. And they
certainly don't remove the need for
thinking hard about the problems that we
face, how to decompose them into small
pieces that allow our AI assistants to
do a good job and how to guide them
towards solutions that we are happy
with. This compartmentalization through
decomposition is the central fundamental
aspect of building software. This is the
real technical skill at the heart of
what it is that we do. And it is this
rather than the speed of typing code
that differentiates good software
development from slop whether AI
generated or not. As always tools matter
but how we use them matters more. If you
found this useful do hit subscribe and
let me know how are the AI tools
changing the way that you think about
maintainability. I'll see you next time.
Thank you very much for watching and if
you enjoy our stuff here on the modern
software engineering channel, please do
consider supporting our work by joining
our Patreon community. There are lots of
benefits to that. To our existing
Patreon members, as ever, I'd like to
thank you for your support. It means a
lot to us and it helps us to to carry on
doing this. Thank you.